Initial Ohakea Aerodrome (#152)
vatnz-dev/sops: docs/aerodromes/Class-D/nzoh.md

---
title: NZOH - Ohakea
---
--8<-- "includes/abbreviations.md"

## Positions

| Position Name | Shortcode | Callsign      | Frequency | Login ID | Usage     |
| ------------- | --------- | ------------- | --------- | -------- | --------- |
| Ohakea SMC    | GOH       | Ohakea Ground | 122.100   | NZOH_GND | Secondary |
| Ohakea ADC    | TOH       | Ohakea Tower  | 134.500   | NZOH_TWR | Primary   |

## Airspace

The Ohakea CTR follows the lateral boundaries as shown below from `SFC` to `A025`, and is designated as `Class D` airspace.

<figure markdown> 
  ![Ohakea Tower Control Zone](./assets/nzoh-airspace.png)
  <figcaption>Ohakea Control Zone (CTR)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Areas of Resposibility

<figure markdown> 

>   ![Ohakea areas of responsibility](./assets/nzoh-resp.png)

Reviewer: Can this diagram be tidied up? It's cut off in places and also not straight in others

  <figcaption>Ohakea Areas of Responsibility</figcaption>
</figure>

## Control Positions

### Ground

#### IFR Clearances

> Controllers shall assign SIDs as suggested by the client. Where an aircraft requests the `OH#S` or `OH#R` departures these may be issued. An assigned heading shall be coordinated with OTMA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Controllers shall assign SIDs as suggested by the client. The `OH#S` and `OH#R` departures may be issued on request from an aircraft. An assigned heading shall be coordinated with OTMA where applicable.
```

#### Start up and Taxi

All departing VFR and IFR aircraft require start clearance.

All fixed wing aircraft shall be issued taxi clearance to a full length holding point, unless an intersection departure is requested by the pilot.

> ## Tower

Reviewer: Want to add anything about the approaches?

> For all circuit traffic - Jet shall fly the circuit at 1700 feet AMSL and all other aircraft shally fly the circuit at 1200 feet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For all circuit traffic - jet aircraft shall fly the circuit at `A017`, and all other aircraft shall fly the circuit at `A012`.
```

## VFR Procedures

### Departures and Arrivals

> Miliary VFR flights arriving or departing the CTR/D shall be cleared via [Transit South, or Transit North.](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Ohakea-NZOH/NZOH_35.1_35.2.pdf) Plain language may be issued to Military VFR aircraft where needed and shall be issued to all civillian aircraft.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Miliary VFR flights arriving or departing the CTR/D shall be cleared via [Transit South, or Transit North.](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Ohakea-NZOH/NZOH_35.1_35.2.pdf){ target=new } Plain language may be issued to Military VFR aircraft where needed and shall be issued to all civillian aircraft.
```

> Miliary VFR flights arriving or departing the CTR/D shall be cleared via [Transit South, or Transit North.](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Ohakea-NZOH/NZOH_35.1_35.2.pdf){ target=new } Plain language may be issued to Military VFR aircraft where needed and shall be issued to all civillian aircraft.

Reviewer: Spelling

### Helicopters

> VFR Helicopter traffic shall be issued a [Helo Departure](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Ohakea-NZOH/NZOH_52.3_52.4.pdf) based on their direction of flight and where they are located on the aerodrome.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
VFR Helicopter traffic shall be issued a [Helo Departure](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Ohakea-NZOH/NZOH_52.3_52.4.pdf){ target=new } based on their direction of flight and where they are located on the aerodrome.
```

Helicopter traffic may operate in Southfield at any time.

## Coordination

> OTMA shall coordinate any non nominated approaches with TOH. Note - Military aircraft will often fly an approach for a non nominated runway, then circle to land the nominated runway.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OTMA shall coordinate any non-nominated approaches with TOH. Note - Military aircraft will often fly an approach for a non-nominated runway, then circle to land the nominated runway.
```

> TOH shall coordinate any IFR departure with OTMA for a radar release. And assigned heading where appliciable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TOH shall coordinate all IFR departures with OTMA for a radar release, as well as an assigned heading where applicable.
```

---
title: NZOH - Ohakea
---
--8<-- "includes/abbreviations.md"

## Positions

> | Position Name | Shortcode | Callsign | Frequency | Login ID | Usage     |

Reviewer: The `Callsign` Field on this table should have the RTF name, not the login ID

| ------------- | --------- | -------- | --------- | -------- | --------- |
| Ohakea SMC    | GOH       | NZOH_GND | 122.100   | NZOH_GND | Secondary |
| Ohakea ADC    | TOH       | NZOH_TWR | 134.500   | NZOH_TWR | Primary   |

## Airspace

The Ohakea CTR follows the lateral boundaries as shown below from `SFC` to `A025`, and is designated as `Class D` airspace.

<figure markdown> 
  ![Ohakea Tower Control Zone](./assets/nzoh-airspace.png)
  <figcaption>Ohakea Control Zone (CTR)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Areas of Resposibility

<figure markdown> 
  ![Ohakea areas of responsibility](./assets/nzoh-resp.png)
  <figcaption>Ohakea Areas of Responsibility</figcaption>
</figure>

## Control Positions

### Ground

#### IFR Clearances

> Controllers shall asign SIDs as suggested by the client. Where an aircraft requests the `OH#S` or `OH#R` departures these may be issued. An assigned heading shall be coordinated with OTMA.

Reviewer: Spelling - `assign`

> #### Start up and Taxiing

Reviewer: Should be `Taxi`

All departing aircraft require start clearance, weather VFR or IFR.

> All fixed wing aircraft shall be taxiied to the full length holding point at all times unless an intersection departure is requested by the pilot.

Reviewer: Would read better as: `All fixed wing aircraft shall be issued taxi clearance to a full length holding point, unless an intersection departure is requested by the pilot.`

## Tower

> For all circuit traffic - Jet shall fly the circuit at 1700 feet AMSL and all other aircraft shally fly the circuit at 1200 feet. Military aircraft **usually** report on base instead of downwind, however a base or downwind call shall surfice for all aircraft.

Reviewer: `Military aircraft **usually** report on base instead of downwind, however a base or downwind call shall surfice for all aircraft.`

This isn't required and should be removed

> Military aircraft are required to report "gear down" before a landing clearance may be issued (this includes touch and goes etc).

Reviewer: Not required to be in the SOP

---
title: NZOH - Ohakea
---
--8<-- "includes/abbreviations.md"

## Positions

| Position Name | Shortcode | Callsign      | Frequency | Login ID | Usage     |
| ------------- | --------- | ------------- | --------- | -------- | --------- |
| Ohakea SMC    | GOH       | Ohakea Ground | 122.100   | NZOH_GND | Secondary |

> | Ohakea ADC    | TOH       | Ohakea Tower  | 134.500   | NZOH_TWR | Primary   |

Reviewer 3: Also include TMA here as we do that for other aerodromes

## Airspace

The Ohakea CTR follows the lateral boundaries as shown below from `SFC` to `A025`, and is designated as `Class D` airspace.

<figure markdown> 
  ![Ohakea Tower Control Zone](../Class-D/Assets/nzoh-airspace.png)
  <figcaption>Ohakea Control Zone (CTR)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Areas of Resposibility

<figure markdown> 
  ![Ohakea areas of responsibility](../Class-D/Assets/nzoh-resp.png)
  <figcaption>Ohakea Areas of Responsibility</figcaption>
</figure>

## Control Positions

### Ground

#### IFR Clearances

Controllers shall assign SIDs as suggested by the client. The `OH#S` and `OH#R` departures may be issued on request from an aircraft. An assigned heading shall be coordinated with OTMA where applicable.

#### Start up and Taxi

All departing VFR and IFR aircraft require start clearance.

All fixed wing aircraft shall be issued taxi clearance to a full length holding point, unless an intersection departure is requested by the pilot.

## Tower

For all circuit traffic - jet aircraft shall fly the circuit at `A017`, and all other aircraft shall fly the circuit at `A012`.

### IFR Arrivals

#### Instrument Approaches

> As default for `RWY 27/09` the ILS shall be the nominated approach. For `RWY 15/33` as there is no ILS, `RNP` shall be the nominated appraoch. For any non-nominated approaches refer to [Coordination](#coordination)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As default for `RWY 09/27` the ILS shall be the nominated approach. For `RWY 15/33` as there is no ILS, `RNP` shall be the nominated approach. For any non-nominated approaches refer to [Coordination](#coordination)
```
Just to keep runways in same order.

#### Visual Approaches

> Aircraft shall be restricted to `A030` unless otherwise coordinated with TOH.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Aircraft shall be restricted to `A030` unless otherwise coordinated with OTMA.
```
?

## VFR Procedures

### Departures and Arrivals

> Military VFR flights arriving or departing the CTR/D shall be cleared via [Transit South, or Transit North.](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Ohakea-NZOH/NZOH_35.1_35.2.pdf){ target=new } Plain language may be issued to Military VFR aircraft where needed and shall be issued to all civilian aircraft.

Reviewer 3: I guess this is a VATIMism but what about non-Military? Are we best to just make it all VFRs to go via Transit N/S?

Author: Might be the best way to do it, shall amend the wording

### Helicopters

VFR Helicopter traffic shall be issued a [Helo Departure](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Ohakea-NZOH/NZOH_52.3_52.4.pdf){ target=new } based on their direction of flight and where they are located on the aerodrome.

Helicopter traffic may operate in Southfield at any time.

## Noise Abatement

Except in an emergency or when on an authorised instrument approach procedure under IMC conditions, departing and arriving aircraft are to avoid

> overflying Sanson (R092/1.5 NM OH VOR/DME) and Bulls (R325/2NM OH VOR/DME). To meet this requirement when operating from the most critical runways the following specific procedures are to be adhered to:

Reviewer 3: Join this line to last one rather than wrap I think

> **Arrival — RWY 15 and RWY 27**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Arrival — RWY 15 and RWY 27
```

- VFR flights are not to overfly Sanson or Bulls
- IFR Flights - When visual, if time permits, IFR flights are to remain visually clear of

>   Sanson and Bulls. However, when adverse weather

Reviewer 3: Join these lines up to make one long paragraph

  conditions exist, no departure from the published instrument approach
  the procedure is expected.

> **ATC requirement: H24 — all IFR flights cleared at 11,000 ft or above:**

Reviewer 3: Not sure if this should be some kind of header or whether this should be an information box or similar? (Unfortunately Vercel preview isn't working so can't visualise it)

- On tracks between radials 215 to 261 (inclusive) Ohakea VOR/DME — maintain 10,000 ft to 60 OH
- On all other tracks — maintain 10,000 ft to 30 OH

!!! Note
    The above level restrictions may be cancelled by OTMA once aircraft are airborne.

## Coordination

> OTMA shall coordinate any non-nominated approaches with TOH. Note - Military aircraft will often fly an approach for a non-nominated runway, then circle to land the nominated runway.

Reviewer 3: Not sure we need this here - I think mostly we've gone with outbound co-ord not inbound?

### Helicopters

VFR Helicopter traffic shall be issued a [Helo Departure](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Ohakea-NZOH/NZOH_52.3_52.4.pdf){ target=new } based on their direction of flight and where they are located on the aerodrome.

Helicopter traffic may operate in Southfield at any time.

## Noise Abatement

Except in an emergency or when on an authorised instrument approach procedure under IMC conditions, departing and arriving aircraft are to avoid
overflying Sanson (R092/1.5 NM OH VOR/DME) and Bulls (R325/2NM OH VOR/DME). To meet this requirement when operating from the most critical runways the following specific procedures are to be adhered to:

### Arrival — RWY 15 and RWY 27

VFR flights are not to overfly Sanson or Bulls. IFR Flights - When visual, if time permits, IFR flights are to remain visually clear of
Sanson and Bulls. However, when adverse weather
conditions exist, no departure from the published instrument approach
the procedure is expected.

## Level Restrictions for Departures

> ATC requirement: H24 — all IFR flights cleared at 11,000 ft or above:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All IFR flights cleared at 11,000 ft or above:
```

  <figcaption>Ohakea Areas of Responsibility</figcaption>
</figure>

## Control Positions

### Ground

#### IFR Clearances

Controllers shall asign SIDs as suggested by the client. Where an aircraft requests the `OH#S` or `OH#R` departures these may be issued. An assigned heading shall be coordinated with OTMA.

#### Start up and Taxiing

> All departing aircraft require start clearance, weather VFR or IFR.

Reviewer: Would read better like this: `All departing VFR and IFR aircraft require start clearance`
